The CMO is the most fired executive in
business. Shorter tenure than any other
C-suite role. And it's not because
marketing stopped working. It's because
of how marketers report on their work.
If you run marketing for a company, an
agency, or a client, the metrics you're
presenting right now might be the thing
that gets you replaced. I'm Neil Patel,
and I'm the co-founder of NP Digital. We
were named performance marketing of the
year by Ad Age. And in this video, I'm
going to break down why good marketers
are losing their jobs over bad
reporting. And give you the exact
framework to fix it. So, the next time
your boss, your client, or your CEO asks
you, "Is this marketing actually
working?" you have an answer that keeps
you in the room. Here's the road map.
Chapter 1.
For years, the playbook was simple.
Rankings go up, traffic goes up, you
send a report with green arrows,
everyone's happy, you keep your job.
That playbook is broken. Traffic is
becoming a vanity metric. And I know
that sounds crazy. We've all been
obsessed with traffic for years. But our
data NP Digital shows something that
surprises most marketers. For many
brands right now, even though traffic is
declining, revenue and conversions
either aren't declining at all, or
they're actually going up. Why? Because
more sessions has never always meant
more buying intent. A lot of that
traffic you've been chasing, it was
never going to convert anyways. Here's
what changed. AI overviews are answering
questions before anyone clicks.
Zero-click searches are rising. People
are researching on ChatGPT, validating
on Reddit, checking YouTube reviews,
reading forms, doing all of that before
they ever visit your website. So, you
might be getting less traffic, but the
traffic you are getting should be
converting at a higher rate. The
problem? If your entire value story is
[music] built on traffic and rankings,
and those numbers dip through no fault
of your own, you look like a problem.
But, here's what's even more dangerous.
Chapter 2.
There's a gap that exists in almost
every marketing organization right now.
And it's the gap between what decision
makers ask, and [music] what marketers
present. The executives ask, "Did
marketing cause growth?" The marketers
answer, "Click-through rate improved
12%."
That's not the same conversation. And
this plays out the same way whether
you're in-house, at an agency, or
freelancing. If you're in-house, your VP
asks you about [music] pipeline, and you
show them impressions. If you're at an
agency, your client asks you about
revenue, you show them keyword rankings.
If you're freelancing, your client asks
you about ROI, you show them a traffic
chart. Same disconnect, different seat.
Here's a stat that puts this in
perspective. 92% of marketers say they
prioritize profit, but their dashboards
are still built for world of 10 [music]
blue links. The tools haven't caught up.
And if you don't change what you
present, you'll be the one who pays.
So, if traffic and rankings aren't the
headline anymore, what should you
actually be measuring? This is where you
have to flip everything upside down.
Chapter 3.
Most marketers build their reporting
from the bottom up. Traffic, clicks,
leads, revenue. That's traditional
funnel everyone uses.
The marketers who keep their jobs,
they build it from the top down. This is
what I call the outcomes-first
measurement stack. At the top, business
outcomes. Revenue, lifetime value,
retention, profit. Those are the metrics
that C-suite and boards actually care
about. In the middle, demand signals.
These are proof that your influence is
working. Things like brand preference,
qualified pipeline, conversion quality
and velocity. How fast leads are moving
through. At the bottom, visibility and
influence. Brand search volume, share of
voice, community engagement. These are
[music] the foundation, not the
headline. Think of it this way. Traffic
and rankings, those are diagnostic
metrics.
They help explain [music] why something
changed, but they never guarantee
business outcomes.
When you walk into a meeting and lead
with revenue impact, LTV, and retention,
you're speaking the language leadership
actually cares about. That one shift
changes how they see you. You go from
activity reporter to growth driver. Now,
let me get even more specific. Chapter
4.
There's a new set of metrics growing in
importance right now. And most of them
have nothing to do with your Google
Analytics dashboard. First, share of
voice. This is how visible you are
relative to your competitors. Not in
isolation, but here's the thing. You can
be growing your traffic, but still
losing ground if your competitors are
growing faster. Second, brand demand
growth. How many people are actively
searching for your brand? Is it going up
or down? This predicts future revenue.
Rising brand search, more direct
traffic, more returning users. These
signal growing preference for your
brand. And you can track this for free
using Google Trends. Third, conversion
quality. Not just how many leads are you
getting, but are the right people
converting? Lead volume can rise while
your close rate falls, your deal size
shrink, and your payback period
stretches. The dashboard still looks
green, but the business is quietly
eroding. Fourth, velocity. How fast are
leads closing? This is one of the most
under-measured metrics in marketing. If
your time to close shrinks, your cost
per acquisition improves, even if lead
volume stays flat. Faster sales cycle
means less working capital tied up and
better cash flow. People now touch your
brand roughly 12 times before buying. If
you only measure the last click, you're
invisible for 11 of those touches. Now,
knowing what to measure is one thing,
but how do you actually prove your
marketing caused growth, and didn't just
capture demand that already existed? The
question is the difference between
keeping your job and losing it.
Chapter 5.
I was in the offices of one of the
largest retailers in the world a couple
months ago.
They'd been spending big on a new AI
channel. Their dashboard looked great.
Leadership was excited. They were about
to scale it up. I asked them one
question. "How many of those customers
are actually net new?" They checked. And
this is, no joke, less than 3% of the
customers they acquired were net new.
They were already marketing to those
customers. Already generating revenue
from them. This new campaign was just
stealing credit from the other channels.
The dashboard said success. The reality
said waste. When they stopped spending
on that channel, revenue didn't really
drop much at all.
They were only paying for sales they
would have never gotten anyways.
This is called incrementality. And it's
the gold standard for proving marketing
impact. Incrementality answers the one
question that determines whether you
keep your budget or you lose it. Did
marketing actually create new revenue,
or did it just take credit? And here's a
brutal version of that question that
executives are really asking behind
closed doors. If we turn marketing off,
what happens? If the answer is not much,
then when budgets get cut, people get
replaced. But here's the thing. There's
a way to make your impact nearly
impossible to question.
Chapter 6.
No single measurement method gives you
the full picture, but there are three
that, if used together, make your impact
bulletproof. Number one, incrementality
testing. This proves true lift. Is this
campaign actually creating new
conversions? 90% of marketers now
prioritize this. You need controlled
experiments, geo holdouts, lift studies.
It creates proof, not correlation.
Number two, media mix modeling. This
reveals which channels drove results
over time. You need about a year of
historical data, but it helps you
understand where your money actually
worked, and where you hit diminishing
returns.
Number three, attribution modeling. This
is your day-to-day lens, useful for
speed and pattern detection. But, never
treat it as gospel. It's great for
filling the gaps, not for making
strategic decisions. Each one alone,
imperfect. Together, they triangulate
the truth. Now, if you need help setting
up these three metrics and having them
work together, check us out at NP
Digital, where we have a dedicated data
and analytics team to help you implement
all of this, so that way you know what's
actually working and what's not. And if
you want, we can even run a lot of your
marketing for you, or work with your
internal teams. Now, here's your move.
Starting this week, one, audit your
current reports. Flag every vanity
metric that's taking up space. If it
doesn't connect to revenue, move it to
the appendix.
Two, flip your next report upside down.
Lead with revenue impact. Lead with LTV.
Lead with conversion quality. Use
traffic and rankings as supporting
detail, not as a headline.
Three, start tracking branded search
growth. Open Google Trends, type in your
brand, type in your competitors, see
who's growing faster. That's free, and
it takes 5 minutes. Four, build a simple
scorecard with three layers. Visibility,
demand, and outcomes. Review them
together, not in isolation. You don't
have to overhaul everything overnight.
Start with one change. Flip your next
report. That single move shifts the
entire conversation.
The marketers who keep their jobs won't
be the ones with the most traffic.
They'll be the ones that can prove they
actually move the needle. If you want to
go deeper on how AI is reshaping how
people find businesses, and what to do
about it, watch this next video.